Feature/35 write first tutorials - first cleanup (#45)
hermes-hmc/workflow: docs/source/dev/start.md

<!--
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2022 German Aerospace Center (DLR), Forschungszentrum Jülich

SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-SA-4.0
-->

<!--
SPDX-FileContributor: Michael Meinel
SPDX-FileContributor: Oliver Bertuch
-->

> # Tutorial: Start to develop HERMES

Reviewer: I know one shall not text for the renderer. Nonetheless, I do like a _short_ title better, as it does not lead to a linebreak in the navigation.

Maybe use this short title for the nav item and long title in text?

> # Tutorial: Start to develop HERMES

Reviewer 2: > Maybe use my short title for the nav item and long title in text?

That would be confusing. Perhaps just:

```suggestion
# Tutorial: Contribute to HERMES
```

> # Tutorial: Start to develop HERMES

Reviewer: I disagree. This tutorial is not about contributing (which would involve creating a fork and create a pull request), but is scoped to how to get going with development.

> # Tutorial: Start to develop HERMES

Reviewer: Here's a thought: Let's make it "Tutorial: Get started" within the "Development" subsection of the nav and make it "Get started wuth HERMES development" in the doc. Cutting of the title seems like a good compromise, as the dev context is not lost due to the heading in the nav bar.

> # Tutorial: Start to develop HERMES

Reviewer: OK after playing around with this again, I think I like this one best:

![grafik](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/5468333/212637100-5a929762-4aa2-4d31-b30b-da4479a9a75d.png)

> # Tutorial: Start to develop HERMES

Reviewer 2: Bit form over matter, but yea, guess that's okay.

> # Tutorial: Start to develop HERMES

Reviewer: At least you do have your precious consistency everywhere :stuck_out_tongue:

Following this tutorial will guide you along setting up a local copy of the code for development of the workflow itself.
This is not necessary if you only want to use HERMES or want to develop an extension plugin loaded at runtime.

```{note}
In the future, there will be a tutorial how to extend HERMES with a plugin available.

> ```

Reviewer 2: I disagree. Making promises in documentation is an anti-pattern. If people wonder how to extend HERMES and can't find it in the documentation, they should be expected to get in touch/create an issue. This text bit doesn't add any value to the documentation.

> ```

Reviewer: I agree. Thanks for pointing it out.

## Prepare your environment

> First, install Python 3.10 and activate your Python environment of you choice (e.g., `venv`, `conda`, `pipenv`, ...).

Reviewer: I disagree. People should be enabled to use what tooling they are accustomed to. Python is a rather diverse ecosystem when it comes to env management and we shall be useable with all of them. Going for poetry envs only is rather opinionated. Having an opinion is fine, but others might disagree.

> First, install Python 3.10 and activate your Python environment of you choice (e.g., `venv`, `conda`, `pipenv`, ...).

Reviewer: @led02 as you wrote this in the first place, WDYT?

> First, install Python 3.10 and activate your Python environment of you choice (e.g., `venv`, `conda`, `pipenv`, ...).

Reviewer 2: I stick with my point. People that develop in Python will have their own preferred way of using envs, and there's no need to bloat our documentation here. People that don't have such a preferred way, or have less experience with using envs, will just want one way to do it, and we should therefore point them to the one tool we introduce here to manage the project.
What if new ways to create and use envs in Python are introduced in the future. Are we expected to maintain this snippet to include these as well? What if usage of a specific env tech drops, what's the market share threshold that triggers a removel from this section?

> First, install Python 3.10 and activate your Python environment of you choice (e.g., `venv`, `conda`, `pipenv`, ...).

Reviewer: That's a very valid point. Ok, let's do this. But let's make transparent that *we* adapted poetry and its envs. Anyone is welcome to go for something else.

This is very dependent on which Python environment you prefer.

Next to Python 3.10 you need to [install `poetry`](https://python-poetry.org/docs/#installation) inside your environment
to manage and install dependencies. Please note we require using `poetry>=1.2`.

If you use `conda`, the above can be achieved with the following commands:

```shell
conda create --name hermes python=3.10 poetry
```

> You should confirm whether to proceed.

Reviewer: @led02 WDYT?

## Get the source code

Next, you need to obtain a version of the HERMES source code.

You can either download it as a zipped package or clone the whole Git repository.
You can clone the repository and enter the project directory as follows:

```shell
git clone https://gitlab.com/hermes-hmc/workflow.git
cd workflow
```

## Learn how our repo is structured

- All Python sources are in the `src` folder
- `pytest` tests are in the `test` folder
- [Architectural Design Records (ADR)](https://adr.github.io/) are in `docs/adr`
- API documentation is automatically generated into `docs/source/api`
- All other Sphinx-based documentation lives in `docs/source/*`

This project uses 

- a development branch (`develop`) to merge developments into, this is the default branch
- actual development is done on "feature" branches (this includes non-feature work such as bug fixing), see also our
  {doc}`contribute`.
- a `main` branch which only includes releases

## Install HERMES and dependencies

To finally install all the required dependencies and HERMES itself, you can now use `poetry`:

```
poetry install
```

> 

Reviewer 2: Note that GitHub preview mangled this. Perhaps better to add manually than commit suggestion, or fix afterwards.

### Which dependencies do we use?

> Our feature implementations build upon these main dependencies:
> 
> - [`click`](https://click.palletsprojects.com/) for providing a commmand line interface
> - [`jsonschema`](https://python-jsonschema.readthedocs.io) to validate different JSON based file formats
> - [`ruaml.yaml`](https://yaml.readthedocs.io) to parse and validate YAML files
> - [`cffconvert`](https://github.com/citation-file-format/cff-converter-python) to harvest data from the CITATION.cff file
> 
> Finally, there are some dependencies that are only required for active development. These are:
> 
> - `pytest`, `pytest-cov` to run the developer tests and monitor the test coverage
> - `Sphinx`, `myst-parser` to build the documentation
> - `flake8` to check the coding style

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To learn what other packages `hermes` depends on, have a look at the project configuration file `pyproject.toml` (in the root of the repository), or use `poetry show --only main`. 

To show dependencies that are only required for active development, or for building documentation run `poetry show --only dev` and `poetry show --only docs` respectively.
```

This list is basically unmaintainable. Show people how to use their tooling instead.

Reviewer: I somewhat agree. Yet I'd still include mentioning our main dependency of `Click` and `Sphinx`, as this is a) unlikely to change and b) an opinionated choice among the available larger frameworks to create and document a CLI app.

Reviewer 2: Mentioning click: okay.
Mentioning Sphinx: inconsequential, as this is the default way to document Python projects.

Reviewer: Alright, fair enough. Will rephrase text local and push again.

> While there is no containerized or installable version of Hermes available yet, you need to install it manually into
> your Python environment for development, see below.
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

There is no informative value by mentioning this here.

## Verify installation works

That's it, you should now have a working development copy of HERMES in your environment.

> You can confirm this by running `hermes`, seeing how it harvests all the information from the input:
> 
> ```shell
> hermes
> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can confirm this by running `hermes --help` to show available commands and options.
```

Suggest to run `--help` to get some initial information instead of running the whole workflow.

## Verify tests can be run

> Tests are implemented using [pytest](https://pytest.org). You can generate coverage report using the `pytest-cov` plugin.
> Both tools are specified as development dependencies in the `pyproject.toml`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Tests are implemented using [pytest](https://pytest.org).
```

Remove duplicate and implicit information.

Reviewer: Dunno, @led02 what do you think?

Reviewer 2: To clarify, the second sentence can be removed, as this is implicit in using poetry and sticking to good practice (i.e., not declaring dev dependencies as main dependencies).

> To verify tests with an extensive HTML report run, execute:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To run all tests, execute `pytest test/` within the activated `poetry` environment.

To create an extensive test coverage report in HTML, execute:
```

Add the simple test run case as well, and change some wording.

Reviewer: Good point!
Yet, I'd rather see it like this:

```suggestion
To run all tests within your activated environment, execute:

```shell
pytest test
```

To create an extensive test coverage report in HTML, to execute within a `poetry` managed environment, run:
```

Reviewer 2: Depends on the result of the discussion above about introducing a world of different envs.

```shell
poetry run pytest test --cov=hermes --cov-branch --cov-report=html --cov-report=term
```

## Optional: Verify docs build

This project comes with extensive documentation that can be built using [Sphinx](https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/).
This also includes automatic API documentation. To build the documentation in your *poetry* environment, run the
following commands from the project root:

```shell
poetry install --with docs
poetry run task docs-build
```

> Or use [`sphinx-autobuild`](https://) to enable a self-updating preview service:

Reviewer 2: There's a URL missing here.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Or use [`sphinx-autobuild`](https://github.com/executablebooks/sphinx-autobuild) to enable a self-updating preview service:
```

```shell
poetry install --with docs
poetry run task docs-live
```

> Note: you need to run `poetry install` again here because the docs dependencies are optional!
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note: you need to run `poetry install` again here because the docs dependencies are optional!

```

IMHO it's sufficient to give people the commands to run.

Reviewer: I disagree. Some people might stumble over this or ignore this step because it's non-obvious how `poetry` handles these things.

Reviewer 2: Why? If I give a code snippet in a tutorial, I expect people to follow it. If they want to learn about how poetry works, they should read the poetry docs. Additionally, `poetry install --with docs` gives enough of a hint towards the necessity to run again, as we have only ever run plain `poetry install` before.

Reviewer: :shrug:
